Emmanuel Jean Candès (born 27 April 1970) is a professor of mathematics, statistics, and electrical engineering (by courtesy) at Stanford University, where he is also the Barnum-Simons Chair in Mathematics and Statistics.   == Academic biography == Candès earned a M.Sc. from the École Polytechnique in 1993. He did his graduate studies at Stanford, where he earned a Ph.D. in statistics in 1998 under the supervision of David Donoho and immediately joined the Stanford faculty as an assistant professor of statistics. He moved to the California Institute of Technology in 2000, where in 2006 he was named the Ronald and Maxine Linde Professor of Applied and Computational Mathematics. He returned to Stanford in 2009.   == Research == Candès' early research concerned nonlinear approximation theory. In his Ph.D. thesis, he developed generalizations of wavelets called curvelets and ridgelets that were able to capture higher order structures in signals. This work has had significant impact in image processing and multiscale analysis, and earned him the Popov prize in approximation theory in 2001. In 2004, Candès wrote a paper with Terence Tao that kicked off the field of compressed sensing: the recovery of sparse signals from a few carefully constructed, and seemingly random measurements. Many researchers have since contributed to this field, which has brought us the idea of a camera that can record pictures while needing only one sensor, and tools for designing distributed sensors that can communicate cheaply.   == Awards and honors == In 2001 Candès received an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship. He was awarded the James H. Wilkinson Prize in Numerical Analysis and Scientific Computing in 2005. In 2001, he received the Vasil A. Popov Prize as well as the National Science Foundation's highest honor: the Alan T. Waterman Award for research described by the NSF as "nothing short of revolutionary". In 2010 Candès and Terence Tao were awarded the George Pólya Prize. In 2011, Candès was awarded the ICIAM Collatz Prize Candès has also received the Lagrange Prize in Continuous Optimization, awarded by the Mathematical Optimization Society (MOS) and the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM). He was also presented with the Dannie Heineman Prize by the Academy of Sciences at Göttingen in 2013. In 2014 he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences. In 2015 he will receive the George David Birkhoff Prize of the AMS / SIAM.   == References ==   == External links == Candès' web page at Stanford.
