Jayanta Kumar Ghosh or Jaẏanta Kumāra Ghosha (Bengali: জয়ন্ত কুমার ঘোষ, born May 23, 1937) is an Indian statistician, currently emeritus professor at Indian Statistical Institute and a professor of statistics at Purdue University.   == Education == He obtained a B.S. from Presidency College, then affiliated with the University of Calcutta, and subsequently a M.A. and a Ph.D. from the University of Calcutta. He started his research career in the early 1960s, studying sequential analysis as a graduate student in the department of statistics at the University of Calcutta.   == Research == Among his best-known discoveries are the Bahadur–Ghosh–Kiefer representation (with R. R. Bahadur and Jack Kiefer) and the Ghosh–Pratt identity along with John W. Pratt. His research contributions fall within the fields of: Bayesian inference Asymptotics Modeling and model selection High dimensional data analysis Nonparametric regression and density estimation Survival analysis Statistical genetics   == Awards/Honors == Elected Member of the International Statistical Institute Advisory Editor, Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference Fellow of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics Fellow of the Indian National Science Academy Life Member and Director of the Calcutta Statistical Association Fellow of the Indian Academy of Sciences Japanese Society for Promotion of Sciences Fellowship, 1978 Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize for Science and Technology, 1981 President, Statistics Section of the Indian Science Congress Association, 1991 President, International Statistical Institute, 1993 Mahalanobis Gold Medal of Indian Science Congress Association, 1998 P. V. Sukhatme Prize for Statistics, 2000 Mahalanobis Memorial Lecture, State Science and Technology Congress, W. Bengal, 2003 D.Sc. (h.c.), B.C. Roy Agricultural University, W. Bengal, India, 2006 Padma Shree (2014) by the Government of India   == Bibliography == He has published over 50 research papers. He has also published four books, which are: Invariance in Testing and Estimation (Lecture Notes), 1967, published by Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta. Higher Order Asymptotics (based on CBMS-NSF lecture), published jointly by Institute of Mathematical Statistics and American Statistical Association, 1994. (with R.V. Ramamoorthi) Bayesian Nonparametrics (Springer 2003). (with Mohan Delampady and Tapas Samanta) An Introduction to Bayesian Analysis - Theory and Methods, Springer 2006.   == References ==   == External links == Indian Statistical Institute Statistics Department homepage Dr. Ghosh's profile at Purdue University
