Ravindra Khattree (born 1959) is an Indian-born statistician and professor of statistics at Oakland University. His contribution to the Fountain–Khattree–Peddada Theorem in Pitman measure of closeness is one of the important results of his work. Khattree is the coauthor of two books and has coedited two volumes. He has served as an associate editor of the Communications in Statistics journal and the editor of the Interstat online journal. He is Chief editor of Journal of Statistics and Applications. He is an elected fellow of the American Statistical Association. Khattree was born in Uttar Pradesh, India. He attended the Ewing Christian College-Allahabad University and the Indian Statistical Institute. In 1985, he earned a doctorate from the University of Pittsburgh with Calyampudi Radhakrishna Rao as his advisor. He became a faculty member at Oakland University in 1991. He was the biostatistics group leader in the Biomedical Research and Informatics Center and a professor of biostatistics in the College of Human Medicine, Michigan State University during 2005–2006. He worked as a senior research scientist at US National Academy of Sciences with assignment at the Radiation Effects Research Foundation (formerly known as Atomic Bomb Casualty Commission), Hiroshima during 2010–2011. Prior to joining Oakland University, he had been a faculty member at the North Dakota State University, Case Western Reserve University and also worked at BFGoodrich Chemical Group. He is the paternal grandson of Binda Prasad Khattri.   == Recognition == In 2002, Khattree received the Young Researcher Award from the International Indian Statistical Association. Khattree was honored with fellowship in the American Statistical Association in 2003 and became an elected member of the International Statistical Institute in 2004. He is also a recipient of Oakland University Research Excellence Award (2008).   == Bibliography == Applied Multivariate Statistics with SAS Software (1995, 1999) with Dayanand N. Naik. Multivariate Data Reduction and Discrimination with SAS Software (2000) with Dayanand N. Naik. Handbook of Statistics Volume 22, Statistics in Industry (2002) with C.R. Rao. Computational Methods in Biomedical Research (2008) with Dayanand N. Naik.   == References ==   == External links == Mathematical Genealogy
