August Ferdinand Möbius (German: [ˈmøːbi̯ʊs]; 17 November 1790 – 26 September 1868) was a German mathematician and theoretical astronomer.   == Early life and education == Möbius was born in Schulpforta, Saxony-Anhalt, and was descended on his mother's side from religious reformer Martin Luther. He was homeschooled until he was 13 when attended the College in Schulpforta in 1803 and studied there graduating in 1809. He then enrolled at the University of Leipzig, where he studied astronomy under the mathematician and astronomer, Karl Mollweide. In 1813 he began to study astronomy under the mathematically inclined professor Carl Friedrich Gauss at the University of Göttingen while Gauss was the director of the Göttingen Observatory. From there he went to study with Carl Gauss's instructor, Johann Pfaff at the University of Halle, where he completed his doctoral thesis The occultation of fixed stars in 1815. In 1816 he was appointed as Extraordinary Professor to the "chair of astronomy and higher mechanics" at the University of Leipzig. Möbius died in Leipzig in 1868 at the age of 77. His son Theodor was a noted philologist.   == Contributions == He is best known for his discovery of the Möbius strip, a non-orientable two-dimensional surface with only one side when embedded in three-dimensional Euclidean space. It was independently discovered by Johann Benedict Listing around the same time. The Möbius configuration, formed by two mutually inscribed tetrahedra, is also named after him. Möbius was the first to introduce homogeneous coordinates into projective geometry. Many mathematical concepts are named after him, including the Möbius plane, the Möbius transformations, important in projective geometry, and the Möbius transform of number theory. His interest in number theory led to the important Möbius function μ(n) and the Möbius inversion formula. In Euclidean geometry, he systematically developed the use of signed angles and line segments as a way of simplifying and unifying results.   == Collected works == Gesammelte Werke erster Band (v. 1) (Leipzig : S. Hirzel, 1885) Gesammelte Werke zweiter Band (v. 2) (Leipzig : S. Hirzel, 1885) Gesammelte Werke dritter Band (v. 3) (Leipzig : S. Hirzel, 1885) Gesammelte Werke vierter Band (v. 4) (Leipzig : S. Hirzel, 1885)   == References ==   == External links == O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F., "August Ferdinand Möbius", MacTutor History of Mathematics archive, University of St Andrews . August Ferdinand Möbius at the Mathematics Genealogy Project August Ferdinand Möbius - Œuvres complètes Gallica-Math A beautiful visualization of Möbius Transformations, created by mathematicians at the University of Minnesota is viewable at http://youtube.com/watch?v=JX3VmDgiFnY Middle School Mathematician Project Short biography of Mobius by middle school students.
