Evgraf Stepanovich Fedorov (Russian: Евгра́ф Степа́нович Фёдоров, 22 December 1853 – 21 May 1919) was a Russian mathematician, crystallographer and mineralogist. Fedorov was born in the Russian city of Orenburg into a family of engineers. The family later moved to Saint Petersburg. From the age of fifteen he was deeply interested in the theory of polytopes, which later became his main research interest. He was a distinguished graduate of the Gorny Institute, which he joined at the age of 26. He contributed to the identification of conditions under which a group of Euclidean motions must have a translational subgroup whose vectors span the Euclidean space. His best-known result is his 1891 proof concerns the Wallpaper group, showing that there are only 17 possible tilings of the plane and then derived independently by George Pólya in 1924. The proof that the list of wallpaper groups was complete only came after the much harder case of space groups had been done. In 1895, he became a professor of geology at the Moscow Agricultural Institute (now the Timiryazev Academy). Fedorov died from pneumonia in 1919 during the Russian Civil War in Petrograd, RSFSR.   == Publications == His first book, "Basics of Polytopes", was finished in 1879 and published in 1885. It offers a classification of polytopes and derives Fedorov polytopes, congruent polytopes that can completely fill space. He wrote the classic "The symmetry of regular systems of figures" in 1891, which contained the first cataloging of the 230 space groups. The same year the equivalent results were presented by German mathematician Schönflies. Fedorov and Schönflies had been intensively discussing the subject during their work, so the results can be somehow considered as joint ones, though Schönflies noted Fedorov priority for some major ideas. He published his classic work "The theodolite method in mineralogy and petrography" in 1893.   == See also == Group theory List of Russian material scientists   == References ==   == External links == Fedorov session 2010. Fedorov session 2008. Fedorov session 2006. Small universal stage after Federow for mineralogical microscopy, Berlin approx. 1900 Universal stage after Federow for mineralogical microscopy, Berlin approx. 1925 Large microscope after Brandão-Leiß with integrated universal stage after Fedorow, Berlin approx. 1925 (Russian) Brief Biography
