Dov M. Gabbay is Augustus De Morgan Professor Emeritus of Logic at the Group of Logic, Language and Computation, Department of Computer Science, King's College London. He has authored over four hundred and fifty research papers and over thirty research monographs. He is editor of several international Journals, and many reference works and Handbooks of Logic, including the Handbook of Philosophical Logic, the Handbook of Logic in Computer Science (with Samson Abramsky and T. S. E. Maibaum), and the Handbook of Artificial Intelligence and Logic Programming. He is Chairman and founder of several international conferences, executive of the European Foundation of Logic, Language and Information and President of the International IGPL Logic Group. He is founder, and joint President of the International Federation of Computational Logic, (UK Charity, Number 1112512). He is also one of the four founders and council member for many years of FoLLI, the Association of Logic, Language and Information, from which he is now retired. He remains a life member. He is co-founder with Jane Spurr of College Publications, a not-for-profit, start-up academic publisher, intended to compete with major expensive publishers at affordable prices, and not requiring copyright assignment from authors.   == Regular positions == 1968–1970 Instructor, Hebrew University of Jerusalem 1970–1973 Assistant Professor of Philosophy, Stanford University 1973–1975 Associate Professor of Philosophy, Stanford University 1975–1977 Associate Professor, Bar-Ilan University 1977–1983 Lady Davis Professor of Logic, Bar-Ilan University 1983–1998 Professor of Computing, Imperial College, London 1998–present Professor of Computing, Professor of Philosophy, Augustus De Morgan Professor of Logic, King's College, London 2009–present Special Professor Bar Ilan University 2015-present Professor of Logics, Ashkelon Academic College   == See also == Gabbay's separation theorem   == References ==   == External links == Home page
